
EXAMPLE SENTENCES

This is the first BreadSpeak sentence ever.
Fi su sa FadeKase deto zeto kagu.

Now the whole earth had one language and the same words.
Deto padu zi zepa seto kase ga sagi gi seko kabo.

And as people migrated from the east, they found a plain in the land of Shinar and settled there.
Seko peka kapo gebe gi se dadu pi Shinar geka so tapi da ge tete pade de. Ko ve ka pagi.

And they said to one another, "Come, let us make bricks, and burn them thoroughly." And they had brick for stone, and bitumen for mortar.
Ko kasa, "Vaku tedi, bi vaku ka zazu seku gegu. Bi vaku deto teko ko so pi veda." so di ge. Ko zepa vete gako veta ga vedi vepo gako fo bapu.

Then they said, "Come, let us build ourselves a city and a tower with its top in the heavens, and let us make a name for ourselves, lest we be dispersed over the face of the whole earth."
Ko ze kasa, "Vaku tedi, bi vaku ka vagu ga pavi gefi zazu zegi gefa pi dape so gako ge. Vaku bi ka saka gako ge gi da ge tu tede so pabi deto padu geze."

And the Lord came down to see the city and the tower, which the children of man had built.
Vaza si peka pufa tedi so gako da befe va peka peta bu ka si vagu gi zazu.

And the Lord said, "Behold, they are one people, and they have all one language, and this is only the beginning of what they will do. And nothing that they propose to do will now be impossible for them.
Vaza peka kasa, "Vaku befo, ko sa peka seto zegu. Seda ko zepa seto kase. Fi su sa sedo zeti zede vo ko ba ka. Seda va ko vapi vu ba sake so kedu ge.

Come, let us go down and there confuse their language, so that they may not understand one another's speech."
Vaku tedi, bi vaku pufa tete. Bi vaku zika ko kase so gako da ko sadi tu kadi ge do kasa."

So the Lord dispersed them from there over the face of all the earth, and they left off building the city.
Vaza peka zisa ka da ko tede so ve de ga pabi deto padu geze. Ko suti ka si vagu.

Therefore its name was called Babel, because there the Lord confused the language of all the earth. And from there the Lord dispersed them over the face of all the earth.
Vaza peka zika si kase zede deto padu du zisa ka da bo saka sa Babel. Vaza peka ka da ko tede so ve de ga pabi deto padu geze.

https://web.archive.org/web/20130603121930/http://fiziwig.com/conlang/syntax_tests.html

The sun shines.
Si pada bezu.

The sun is shining.
Si pada zi bezu.

The sun shone.
Si pada bu bezu.

The sun will shine.
Si pada ba bezu.

The sun has been shining.
Si pada zi gi bu bezu.

The sun is shining again.
Si pada seve bezu.

The sun will shine tomorrow.
Si pada bezu so pi zeso tadi.

The sun shines brightly.
Si pada zu bezu.

The white sun shines.
Si bege pada bezu.

The sun is rising now.
Si pada zi gi bese tete.

All the people shouted.
Seda peka beva kasa.

Some of the people shouted.
Seko peka beva kasa.

Many of the people shouted twice.
Sezu peka seta gi beva kasa.

Happy people often shout.
Fegi peka sezu beva kasa.

The kitten walked forward.
Si peke pafo teso.

The kitten walked onto the grass.
Si peke teso so pabi pede.

My little kitten walked away.
Ki za peke de teso.

It's raining.
Vefa.

The rain came down.
Si vefa pufa tedi.

The kitten is playing in the rain.
Si peke febi pi vefa.

The rain has stopped.
Si vefa bu suti.

Soon the rain will stop.
Si vefa taki suti.

I hope the rain stops soon.
Ki gapa da si vefa taki suti.

Once wild animals lived here.
Kedi gi seko pepe seto gi vi sasa.

Slowly she looked around.
Po tita befo paki.

Go away!
Vaku tidi!

Let's go!
Bi vaku tete!

You should go.
Ke vatu tete.

I will be happy to go.
Ki fegi so zedu do tete.

He will arrive soon.
To taki tedi.

The baby's ball has rolled away.
Pete gego bu tedo de.

The two boys are working together.
Si gi seta gi pezu peta peka teso.

This mist will probably clear away.
Fi vege ba gi sazu tete de.

Lovely flowers are growing everywhere.
Kefo pepa sati zu pi seda papo.

We should eat more slowly.
Bi vatu deko tita fato.

You have come too soon.
Ke desu taki tedi.

You must write more neatly.
Ke gaba da deko vefe zabi.

Directly opposite stands a wonderful palace.
Vase zu gagi zazu gevi so gebi paka.

Henry's dog is lost.
Bu kupo Henry peko.

My cat is black.
Ki peke bego.

The little girl's bowl is broken.
Za pezi peta zabo bu gedi.

I usually sleep soundly.
Ki segu gagi pevu.

The children ran after Jack.
Seko peta teta teda Jack.

I can play after school.
Ki sake febi taso do kati.

We went to the village for a visit.
Bi tete di si vagu du gako do befe.

We arrived at the river.
Bi bu tedi si dapu.

I have been waiting for you.
Ki bu deta ke.

The children sat around the fire.
Si gi seko peta geva pupi veda.

A little girl with a kitten sat near me.
Za pezi peta zegi peke geva so paki ki.

The child waited at the door for her father.
Si peta deta ge pezu zefo so paki dade.

Yesterday the oldest girl in the village lost her kitten.
Deda tuza fo pezi deku si vagu kupo ge peke so pi ziso tadi.

Were you born in this village?
Ke saze peva so pi fi vagu?

Can your brother throw well?
Ke pezu zefa saze sake gagi bafa?

Did the man leave?
Si fo pezu saze tidi?

Is your sister coming for you?
Ke pezi zefa saze tedi so gako ke?

Can you come tomorrow?
Ke sake tedi so pi zeso tadi?

Have the neighbors gone away for the winter?
Seko peka paki saze tidi so gako kida tado?

Does the bird sing in the rain?
Si pebe saze kasa fesa so pi vefa?

Are you going with us to the concert?
Ke saze tete so zegi bi ga di fesa satu?

Have you ever travelled in the forest?
Ke saze tete pi pevi dadu ga pi sagu tata?

We walked down the river for several miles.
Bi pafa teso so paki dapu ga tapi seko geke seka sevo sete.

Everybody knows about hunting.
Seda peka kapa da vake pepe.

On a Sunny morning after the solstice we started for the mountains.
Bi sati tete so di dafu ga pi tabi bezu zeti taso keda tado pazo.

Tom laughed at the monkey's tricks.
Tom fefa keka peda seko fa detu fedo.

An old man with a walking stick stood beside the fence.
Tuza fo pezu zegi do teso dagu gevi so paki si davi.

The squirrel's nest was hidden by drooping boughs.
Pevi pato gi seko dagu biko za peda pagi.

The little seeds waited patiently under the snow for the warm spring sun.
Za gi seko pedi fipi deta keda tado pada so puga veke vefa.

Many little girls with wreaths of flowers on their heads danced around the bonfire.
Sezu gi pezi peta zegi kefo pepa geso pabi ge daku tete so keko fesa ga paki veda.

The cover of the basket fell to the floor.
Si zabo fo zapu tebo so di davu.

The first boy in the line stopped at the entrance.
Zeto gi pezu peta pi si zefi tite so pi do tezu papo.

On the top of the hill in a little hut lived a wise old woman.
Keka gi tuza fo pezi pepi so pabi si dafu gefa ga pi za zazu.

During our residence in the country we often walked in the pastures.
Bi sezu teso so pede dadu ga pi ge do tite pi si vadu.

When will your guests from the city arrive?
Ke seko zepi de vagu tedi so tadi sazi tata?

Near the mouth of the river, its course turns sharply towards the East.
Dapu tega geti tedo so paki bo davo ga di fo pade.

A box of growing plants stood in the window.
Pepa pepi so pi gegu vu gevi so pi si dabi.

I am very happy.
Ki zu fegi.

These oranges are juicy.
Vepi pi fi gi seko beta fasi.

Sea water is salty.
Dapi vedo beza.

The streets are full of people.
Seko zaze zada so keko peka.

Sugar tastes sweet.
Fazi bezi.

The fire feels hot.
Si veda keze fo keda.

The little girl seemed lonely.
Za gi pezi peta keze fa figi sedo.

The little boy's father had once been a sailor.
Za gi pezu peta pezu zefo seto sa fa vako vedo zaso.

I have lost my blanket.
Ki bu kapo ge veza.

A bird has built his nest in the apple tree.
Se pebe bu ka ge pagi pi besa fasi si pevi.

At noon we ate our lunch by the roadside.
Bi fato ge fadi so paki si zaze ga pi tabi pazo.

Mr. Jones made a knife for his little boy.
Mr. Jones ka fa zato bati fu gako ge zifo.

Their voices sound very happy.
Ko do kasa bezo keze fa zu fegi.

Is today Monday?
Fi tadi saze zeto so deku tade?

Have all the leaves fallen from the tree?
Seda dasu saze bu tebo so de si pevi?

Will you be ready on time?
Ke saze ba tu tutu gaki?

Will you send this message for me?
Ke saze ba teve fi zavo gako ki?

Are you waiting for me?
Ke saze deta ki?

Is this the first kitten of the litter?
Fi peke saze zeto so deku do peva?

Are these shoes too big for you?
Fi date zaza saze desu zu so deku ke?

How wide is the River?
Dapu do gefe sa sazi seku?

Listen.
Vaku bevo.

Sit here by me.
Vaku geva so paki ki.

Keep this secret until tomorrow.
Vaku pasu fi fo zige so tase zeso tadi.

Come with us.
Vaku tedi zegi bi.

Bring your friends with you.
Vaku tepa ke seko zepi so zegi ke.

Be careful.
Vaku kepa.

Have some tea.
Vaku zepa dasu fapi.

Pip and his dog were great friends.
Pip ga ge peko sa gagi zepi.

John and Elizabeth are brother and sister.
John gi Elizabeth sa zefa.

You and I will go together.
Ke gi ki ba pake tete.

They opened all the doors and windows.
Ko bu zate seda dade gi dabi.

He is small, but strong.
To za ga zesa bazu.

Does the sky look blue or gray?
Dape keze sazi fa bedo go bega?

Come with your father or mother.
Vaku tedi zegi ge pa pezi go pezu pu zefo.

I am tired, but very happy.
Ki fedi ga zesa zu fegi.

He played a tune on his wonderful flute.
To ka fesa so keko ge gepu gagi zato.

Toward the end of August the days grow much shorter.
Seko tabi sati zu gifi so paki zeku sese tada ziti.

A company of soldiers marched over the hill and across the meadow.
Fo vapu zegu beva teso so paga si dafu ga paka pede si dadu.

The first part of the story is very interesting.
Fi katu zeto dagi zu fefi.

The bird dropped some pebbles into the pitcher and raised the water to the brim.
Pebe bu teko seko gi za veta so pi zapi du tefa si vedo so di gefa.

The baby clapped her hands and laughed in glee.
Si pete ka dabu bezo fu fefa pi do fegi.

Stop your game and be quiet.
Vaku sufi ge feba du ga da vaku biva.

The sound of the drums grew louder and louder.
Fesa si zato bezo sati beva ga sati beva.

Do you like summer or winter better?
Ke feta sazi pa keda go kida pu tado?

That boy will have a wonderful trip.
Fe gi pezu peta ba zepa zu gagi do tete.

They popped corn, and then sat around the fire and ate it.
Ko ka da fate fada. Ko geva so taso ga paki bafu fu fato si fate.

They won the first two games, but lost the last one.
Ko gati zeto seta feba fu zesa guti fo zito.

Take this note, carry it to your mother; and wait for an answer.
Vaku tiko fi zavo. Vaku teko bo di ge pezi zefo. Vaku deta vo kasi.

I awoke early, dressed hastily, and went down to breakfast.
Ki tatu sati pivu. Ki teta tezu zaza. Ki pufa tete gako tatu fadi.

Aha! I have caught you!
Aha! Ki bu bufa ke!

This string is too short!
Fi zafi desu gifi!

Oh, dear! the wind has blown my hat away!
Oh, figi! Si vezo bu bade ki daku zaza so de!

Alas! that news is sad indeed!
Feti! Fe zata bu gi kaki figi!

Whew! that cold wind freezes my nose!
Whew! Fe Kida vezo ka da ki daze sa vepo!

Are you warm enough now?
Ke saze zi dego keda?

They heard the warning too late.
Ko bu desu tutu beve si do kavi.

We are a brave people, and love our country.
Bi sa kede peka. Bi feta ge vadu.

All the children came except Mary.
Seda peta zetu Mary bu tedi.

Jack seized a handful of pebbles and threw them into the lake.
Jack bu bapo dabu seku zede veta. To bu bafa ko so di si dapi.

This cottage stood on a low hill, at some distance from the village.
Fi zazu gevi so pabi pufa dafu ga keko suki geke de si vagu.

On a fine summer evening, the two old people were sitting outside the door of their cottage.
Tuza gi seta peka geva so pe ge zazu dade ga pi keda tado gagi tabi ziti.

Our bird's name is Jacko.
Bi pebe saka sa Jacko.

The river knows the way to the sea.
Si dapu kapa tega di dapi.

The boat sails away, like a bird on the wing.
Vedo si zaso tete so de ga kezu pebe pabi do tepe dagu.

They looked cautiously about, but saw nothing.
Ko kepa gi bu befo paki. Ko zesa befe seto su.

The little house had three rooms, a sitting room, a bedroom, and a tiny kitchen.
Si gi za zazu zepa sete dazu: do geva dazu ga do pevu dazu ga do fada za dazu.

We visited my uncle's village, the largest village in the world.
Bi bu tedi ki zefo zefa fa vagu deda zu fu deku deto paso.

We learn something new each day.
Bi kati se gi taza su pi seda tadi.

The market begins five minutes earlier this week.
Vazu si zese tatu sati so keko sesu take ga pi fi tade.

Did you find the distance too great?
Ke saze kape da si geke desu zu?

Hurry, children.
Vaku teta, seko peta.

Madam, I will obey your command.
Fo pezi, ki ba teda ke vo vapa.

Here under this tree they gave their guests a splendid feast.
Ko vi zeve gagi fadi so di ge seko zepi ga puga fi pevi.

In winter I get up at night, and dress by yellow candlelight.
Ki sati pivu so pi kida tado. Ki tezu zaza so paki vede bete bebi.

Tell the last part of that story again.
Vaku seve kadu fe katu zito dagi.

Be quick or you will be too late.
Vaku teta so gako du tu desu tutu.

Will you go with us or wait here?
Ke saze tete so zegi bi? Ke saze vi deta?

Think first and then act.
Vaku zeto kake tuso da deka.

I stood, a little mite of a girl, upon a chair by the window, and watched the falling snowflakes.
Ke, za do pezi kezu pesa, gevi pabi zaga paki si dabi. Ki befo veke si gi tebo vefa.

Show the guests these shells, my son, and tell them their strange history.
Vaku beko fi gi seko veko so di seko fo tedi, ki zifo. Vaku kadu ko sigu katu so di ko.

Be satisfied with nothing but your best.
Vaku fegi so zedu setu su zetu ke fa deda gagi.

We consider them our faithful friends.
Bi kape da ko sa bi keve zepi.

We will make this place our home.
Bi ba ka da fi papo sa bi pagi.

The squirrels make their nests warm and snug with soft leaves.
Seko peda ka da ge pagi keda du so keko vega dasu.

The little girl made the doll's dress herself.
Si gi pezi peta ka si peka za gega zaza so keko sedo ge.

I hurt myself.
Ki bu kiba ge.

She was talking to herself.
Po bu kasa di ge.

He proved himself trustworthy.
To bu beko da ge sa gagi peka.

We could see ourselves in the water.
Bi bu sake befe ge pi si vedo.

Do it yourself.
Vaku deka bo so keko sedo ge.

I feel ashamed of myself.
Ki fetu beki zedu ge.

Sit here by yourself.
Vaku vi geva so zegi setu peka.

They wore red caps, the symbol of liberty.
Ko zazo daku besa zaza, fo kako do vage.


